# Getting and Cleaning Data Course Project

This repo is meant to contain the code for the programming assignment of the [Getting and Cleaning Data course](https://www.coursera.org/learn/data-cleaning) provided by John Hopkins University as a part of their [Data Science Specialization on Coursera](https://www.coursera.org/specializations/jhu-data-science).

## Objective
To create a tidy data set out of the data collected from accelerometers from the Samsung Galaxy S smartphone provided by http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Human+Activity+Recognition+Using+Smartphones.

## Workflow
- The raw data provided to us is present in [UCI HAR Dataset](https://github.com/Priyansh121096/DSCourse3Assignment1/tree/main/UCI%20HAR%20Dataset) directory. Details about the raw data set can be read from [UCI HAR Dataset/README.txt](UCI HAR Dataset/README.txt).
- The script [run_analysis.R](run_analysis.R) performs the following transformations on the raw data and generates a tidy data set [final_data_aggregated.txt](final_data_aggregated.txt) whose data is described in [CodeBook.md](CodeBook.md):
  1. First activity labels (activity_id -> activity_name) are read from `UCI HAR Dataset/activity_labels.txt`.
  2. Then, test and training data are fetched from `UCI HAR Dataset/<test/train>/X_<test/train>.txt` respectively.
    - Each record in these tables is enriched with activity names by first fetching activity ids for the records from `UCI HAR Dataset/<test/train>/y_<test/train>.txt`, transforming them to activity names and then enriching the rows with these activity names.
    - Each record is enriched with the subject ids for the records stored in `UCI HAR Dataset/<test/train>/subject_<test/train>.txt`.
  3. The test and the train tables from #2 are merged row-wise into a single table.
  4. The column names of the table from #3 are replaced with feature names stored in `UCI HAR Dataset/features.txt`.
  5. Only columns containing the strings "mean()" or "std()" are retained from the table in #4 (details about the measurements can be found in `UCI HAR Dataset/features_info.txt`).
  6. Column names of table in #5 are transformed to human readable names by converting "mean()" to "Mean" and "std()" to "STD" and getting rid of hyphens ("-").
  7. The final data set is generated by taking the mean of each measurement in the table from #6 grouped at the (activity, subject) grain. This means that each row in this table contains the mean of each column in #6 (except, of course, the activity and subject columns) for a single (activity,subject) combination. For example, the following row:
    ```
    "activity" "subject" "tBodyAccMeanX" "tBodyAccMeanY" "tBodyAccMeanZ" ...
    "LAYING" 1 0.22159824394 -0.0405139534294 -0.11320355358 ...
    ```
    contains mean of each measurement for subject with ID "1" for the "LAYING" activity.

The data table obtained from this step is written to [final_data_aggregated.txt](final_data_aggregated.txt).